hi everyone my name is Dr Mark eonon
welcome to heal NPD we're all familiar
with the grandiosity in pathological
narcissism and NPD things like arrogance
devaluing attitudes toward other people
and entitlement are often seen as
comprising the entirity of the disorder
but while grandiosity may be the most
visible aspect of pathological
narcissism it's far from the whole story
typically it's only the surface of a
much deeper more complex struggle
[Music]
in pathological narcissism and NPD
grandiosity is only the surface of
something much deeper beneath lies
profound vulnerability loss dependency
and shame these hidden Dynamics are
crucial to understanding the condition
grandiosity isn't just a trait or
behavior it's a defense one that
protects against feelings of fragility
and unmet emotional
needs pathological narcissism is the
result of a tragic disparity between a
child's emotional needs and what their
early care environment was able to
provide for decades the literature has
pointed again and again to a combination
of emotional neglect and subtle or overt
pressure that's placed on the child to
gratify a caregivers own narcissistic
strivings I call this a narcisso genic
environment and it's something I've
encountered countless times in my own
work as a narcissism specialist a
narciss ogenic environment is one where
the child's core emotional needs for
empathic mirroring are not being met
simultaneously the child is pushed to
fulfill a caregiver's emotional needs by
embodying the parents expectations in
response the child unconsciously
constructs a false self that appears to
be exactly what the caregiver wants it's
shiny compliant and seems to be without
any actual emotional needs of its own
the false self is an unconscious attempt
to be perfectly self-sufficient so that
the child can be spared the pain of
having needs that are rejected punished
or shamed it creates an illusion that
allows the child to survive in a world
where parental love is conditional but
like any illusion there's a reality
that's hidden from view Swiss
psychologist and psychoanalyst Alice
Miller described the false self as
having two sides one is grandiose and
the other is depressive she wrote I
consider one to be the reverse of the
other grandiosity and depression behind
manifest grandiosity depression is
constantly lurking and hiding behind a
depressive mood there are often
unconscious or or conscious but split
off fantasies of grandiosity end quote
the false self is an adaptation a
defense that allows the child to receive
some love or validation in an
environment where genuine love and
empathic connection are not available
leaving the child without the relational
tools needed to construct a stable and
realistic
self-image it's a life preserver that
gives form to an otherwise formless
internal experience
in a previous video I described the
false self as an island of cohesive
identity in a sea of identity diffusion
we don't become a self on our own
identity is inextricably relational what
is self is not other and what is other
is not self we discover who we are in
relationship to others we discover and
integrate our angry feelings destructive
feelings our hate joy and love in the
context of our earliest
relationships but what happens when a
child senses whether consciously or
unconsciously that their caregiver
simply can't tolerate the child's
authentic needs and
feelings what happens when the caregiver
simply ignores parts of the child that
they don't like even worse what happens
when a caregiver responds to those parts
with disgust or
disdain how does a small child who's
totally dependent on their caregiver for
love and support accept something that
is reacted to with Rage or disgust as
self moreover what if there is a
simultaneous pressure to be someone or
something that the child is not someone
or something that the caregiver wants or
needs the child to be children are
incredibly adaptable they do their best
to become exactly what their caregivers
want or need them to be it's a matter of
surv Bible ideally the caregiver's role
is to see and love the whole child to
celebrate the child's emerging
Independence and unique personality even
the unpleasant frustrating or
disappointing Parts caregivers should be
able to tolerate and quote survive the
child's anger fear need and
disappointment but some caregivers send
pervasive messages that they can't
withstand such feelings in the ch child
they respond to the child's anger or
sadness or other emotional needs with
their own Rage or by mocking the child
or making the child feel small
ridiculous or bad for having such
feelings they make the child a bad
object which feels so traumatic to most
children that they will immediately
begin to reorganize their growing Minds
to split off or conceal anything that
seems to result in loss of their
caregiver's love over time this pressure
becomes internalized the split-off parts
go underground a grandiose false self is
created one that's scrubbed of all the
traits or feelings that the caregiver
can't seem to
tolerate this version of self looks
independent and capable but in reality
it's still entirely dependent on other
people for validation and that's because
it's not a product of authentic
self-experience it doesn't really belong
to the child it's a patchwork of traits
and qualities that mirror what the
caregiver demanded it is therefore
forever Tethered to external approval
and validation the false self emerges to
compensate for a profound and tragic
loss the caregiver or selfobject that
the child needed wasn't available in the
way that the child needed the child
wasn't able to use the caregiver to
forge a stable integrated and authentic
self the real self was ignored in favor
of a false self what was true and
intrinsically theirs was overlooked or
actively discouraged in favor of a false
self that the caregiver seemed to prefer
this loss is profound and it represents
the very Foundation of narcissistic
defenses Alice Miller wrote the
narcissistically Disturbed patient did
not have a selfobject at his dis
disposal nor a usable object which could
survive the child's destructive emotions
both the depressive and the grandiose
person deny this Reality by living as
though the availability of the self
object could still be salvaged the
grandiose person through the illusion of
achievement and the depressive through
his constant fear of losing the self
object and quote grandiosity seeks to
undo this loss it says I'm impervious to
need I'll become so extraordinary that
no one will ever abandon me again
depression on the other hand is an
attack on the self in lie of an attack
on the object children tend to blame
themselves when bad things happen it
provides a feeling of control so when
caregivers aren't meeting a child's
emotional or attachment needs the child
might blame themselves they turn their
anger inward in order to regain a
feeling of control over something that's
otherwise totally outside of their
control the self is blamed in the hopes
that the loss could be undone if only
the self could improve but neither
grandiosity nor depression can change
the unchangeable the loss has already
happened only when this immutable
reality is accepted when the person
allows themsel to grieve what they never
got can the self begin to heal and move
forward the false self was created in
denial of this original loss this core
narcissistic wound but it quickly
becomes Its Own Prison the person grows
up to seek validation and admiration
which are experiences that reinforce
grandiosity and collude with the
individual's denial of the wounds that
lie
underneath however on some level the
person knows that the validation isn't
genuine it's praise for the false self
and they're aware deep down of profound
deficits and dependencies inside
themselves feelings that they may be
terrified to let anyone else see the
person feels compelled to keep it hidden
beneath a grandiose facade with the
result being that the love they receive
in adulthood often feels just as
conditional as the quote love they
received as children Miller writes it is
thus impossible for the grandiose person
to cut the tragic link between
admiration and love in his compulsion he
seeks insatiably for admiration of which
he never gets enough because admiration
is not the same thing as love end quote
unconsciously the person may desperately
want someone to see through these
defenses to truly understand the pain
underneath but most people are fooled by
the false self and those who do see
through these defenses are often
rejected before they have a chance to
expose the underlying shame so anger and
resentment build there's often contempt
toward people who are so easily fooled
by this facade and this contempt
reflects the depth of unmet emotional
need that lies underneath the individual
can't face the Unspeakable loss that
motivates their pain and necessitates
these defenses and so they end up sort
of rediscovering the same feelings of
rejection and conditional love over and
over again as they move through life
unaware that the very thing that allowed
them to survive childhood is now costing
them real intimacy and meaningful
connection this trap is
self-reinforcing the longer someone with
pathological narcissism or NPD spends in
a relationship the more invested it
feels everyone becomes in the false self
and the more they would risk by allowing
their authentic needs and feelings to
become known the stakes get higher and
honesty begins to feel less and less
possible sometimes this causes a sudden
shift a snap in their attitudes or
feelings in relationships adults who
were raised in a narcisso enic
environment may eventually discover a
veritable geyser of anger and resentment
toward their parents or caregivers that
they never realized was there I've had
parents of adult children reach out to
me confused and heartbroken because
they're formerly kind or respectful
child has suddenly turned toward them
with contempt such parents often meant
well when their child was young it's
hard to explain the emotional wounds
that their child likely carried they're
often too defended to really get it too
invested in their preferred narrative
that they were excellent parents and
that their child is simply inexplicably
bad all of a sudden they don't realize
when they say these things that they're
showing the very traits that caused the
problem in the first place they usually
won't allow themselves to face the
reality of what happened because it
would cost them too much in terms of
self-image or
self-esteem most choose to Simply remain
perplexed as to why their adult child
suddenly switch to open hostility after
Decades of deference I typically counsel
such parents to let go of their defenses
and to try to Simply listen and accept
whatever it is that their adult child is
telling them
whether or not they agree with it most
are unable or unwilling to do that and I
see in this sad but fairly common
predicament the continuing tragedy that
creates and maintains pathological
narcissism their adult child is
attempting to speak a truth that has
been hidden or denied for decades when
the pain has finally gotten unbearable
and the dam has finally burst the
parents again demonstrate an
unwillingness to see their child for who
they are rather than for who the parents
want or need them to be they think
they're doing the right thing they think
that the child's false self was the real
person and they want that false self
back again because it made them feel so
good about themselves as parents it
gratified them it can be incredibly
painful for parents to face this truth
and of course I'm not intending to blame
parents for poor mental health outcomes
most parents don't intend to harm their
children they're often doing the very
best that they can with the tools that
they have but acknowledging the past is
necessary for healing to begin and such
parents must recognize their child's
sudden anger toward them as the
emergence of a real person who they
either never knew or perhaps who they
never cared to know in the face of that
unfolding tragedy so many years before
their child created a false self to
avoid disaster it was a desperate
unconscious attempt to preserve the
caregiver's love the grandio false self
looks ego-driven but at its core it's
fundamentally relational and
paradoxically it's an attempt to
preserve connection yet when the
authentic self underneath is revealed it
often triggers a collapse into shame and
despair I remember sitting in a case
conference a colleague was presenting a
case that had significant narcissistic
elements and they were talking about the
patient's resistance to therapy I
offered this thought if the patient were
to allow themselves to be seen it would
trigger incredible shame but worse still
if they were ever to truly recognize the
false self- defenses that dominate their
lives they would be forced to face all
that was never
actualized all of the unexpressed
emotions all of the missed opportunities
for genuine connection
all of the authentic longings and
desires that were paved over in favor of
a shiny carrus designed to meet other
people's expectations essentially they
would be faced with grieving a life not
lived and where does anyone even start
with such a tremendous project this is
why NPD is often treatment resistant it
isn't because the person doesn't have a
heart or a soul it's because to face the
tragic cost of these defensive
would be to in some way face One's Own
Death a metaphorical death to be sure
but a kind of death nonetheless and one
that happened very early on Healing
Begins With accepting that loss the loss
that the false self was designed to deny
it's a Monumental task grieving not just
what was missing in the past but all the
opportunities for connection and
authenticity that were lost along Ong
the way this isn't something that
happens overnight grieving this loss
confronting these defenses and
rediscovering authenticity is a gradual
and often painful process but it's one
that leads to real freedom and authentic
connection Alice Miller described the
false self as offering a hollow prize
one that no one would actually want if
they had a choice between grandiosity
versus real love it's a defense against
grieving a terrifying and tragic loss
one that has already occurred and that
can't be undone you can't make up for it
by being amazing nor can you somehow
reclaim the love that wasn't received by
attacking the self what's done is done
the good news is that even though it
might feel like you died all those years
ago you didn't you actually survived
every once in a while I'll read an
article about some ancient mural or
mosaic discovered buried under a modern
Street in Rome when the dirt and debris
are cleared away there it is in all of
its former Vibrance and Glory it was
never gone it was just concealed and I
think the authentic self is like this
it's never really lost it's only hidden
from view once you realize this I mean
once you really get it that the love
you're seeking through grandiosity has
already been lost
that attacking or devaluing yourself
won't bring it back a sense of emptiness
usually follows if not grandiosity then
what what will bring my life meaning now
that grandio Pursuits feel empty and the
false self has been exposed for the
clown costume it always was whenever I
see that in a patient I know we're on
the right track because where the false
self was there authenticity shall be the
The Emptiness isn't a bad thing it's an
open space where something real can
emerge and grow I recently rewatched The
Karate Kid there's a beautiful scene
where Mr Miyagi is pruning bonsai trees
and he invites Daniel to do the same
Miyagi tells him to close his eyes and
to imagine how he wants his tree to look
Daniel says but how do I know if my idea
is the right one and Miyagi replies if
it comes from inside you
it's always the right one when you make
space for your authentic self to emerge
it's always right because it's true
whatever you're struggling with whatever
you're facing know that there is
absolutely 100% a real person inside of
you I don't know what you've been
through I don't know what you've
suffered or endured maybe you've hurt
people maybe you've even hurt
yourself take a page from miyagi's book
close close your eyes and breathe deeply
try to make a space inside for something
to emerge whatever comes up whether it's
an image a feeling or a memory make
space for it if it's a judgment about
yourself Let It Go if it's a striving to
be something you're not let it go
remember depression and grandiosity are
attempts to deny a loss that can't be
undone so let them go wait for something
else to emerge something that feels true
that feels like it's yours and then
follow it and see where it takes
you okay so that's it for today this
video started as a weekly Insight video
for my paid members but it evolved into
something that felt more appropriate for
main Channel content so I'm publishing a
companion to this video for paid members
on my channel and if you'd like to see
that video and also receive weekly
videos from my channel consider becoming
a paid member your support helps me to
make more content more often as always
please leave questions or comments below
and until next time take good care
[Music]